.TH DCACHE-BOOTLOADER 8 "August 2010" "" ""

.SH NAME
BootLoader \- Boot loader for dCache

.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBjava\fR org.dcache.util.BootLoader [OPTION]... COMMAND [ARGS]

.SH DESCRIPTION

The low level boot loader of dCache. It is used by the init script to
start domains and to parse configuration files. There is usually no
need to invoke the boot loader directly.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB-q\fR
Do not emit warnings if configuration assigns values to deprecated or
obsolete properties.

.TP
\fB-f\fR=PATH[:PATH]...
Paths to the dCache setup files.  Each supplied PATH is is either a
file or a directory.  If PATH is a file then it is read as a dCache
configuration file.  If PATH is a directory then all files in that
directory that end \fB.properties\fR are parsed as configuration
files. The ordering is significant as the paths are scanned in the
order specified and the last declaration of a configuration parameter
will be used.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
.B start DOMAIN
start a domain. DOMAIN is the name of the domain to start. The layout
file is scanned and the batch files of services defined for this
domain are executed.

.TP
.B compile
generates a shell function that can provide any configuration property
of any configured domain.

.SH CONFIGURATION PROPERTIES

Most properties are interpreted by services. A few properties are
however used by the boot loader directly. These are described below.

.TP
.B dcache.layout.uri
The URI to the layout file. The boot loader scans the layout file to
determine the domains and services specified for this dCache host.

.TP
.B domain.service.uri
The URI to a service batch file. For each service the boot loader
executes this batch file to instantiate that service.

.TP
.B domain.preload
The URI to a batch file executed during domain startup before any
services are started.

.TP
.B dcache.log.configuration
The URI to the log configuration file.

.P
In addition to the above properties, all Java system properties are
available. A summary of the standard properties is available at
\fBhttp://download-llnw.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/System.html#getProperties%28%29\fR


.SH IMPLICIT CONFIGURATION PROPERTIES

Some properties are injected into the configuration by the boot loader
and cannot be defined in configuration files. Configuration files may
however make use of these properties to define other properties.

.TP
.B host.name
The host name of this host.

.TP
.B host.fqdn
The fully qualified domain name of this host.

.TP
.B domain.name
The name of the current domain as defined in the layout file.

.TP
.B domain.service
The name of the current service as defined in the layout file.

.TP
.B dcache.domains
White space separated list of all names of domain on this host.

