.TH DCACHE 8 "July 2007" "" ""

.SH NAME
dcache \- The dCache distributed storage resource manager

.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBdcache\fR [OPTION]... COMMAND

.SH DESCRIPTION

This is an init and management script for dCache hosts. For a full
description of dCache and its configuration, please visit the dCache
webpage at http://www.dcache.org.

This script only manages services running on the local host, i.e., all
commands only affect the local host. The script is not intended for
central management of a distributed dCache installation.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB-d\fR=PATH 
where dCache is installed. If not provided, the value from the
environment variable DCACHE_HOME is used. If DCACHE_HOME is not
defined, then /opt/d-cache/ is used.

.SH STARTUP COMMANDS

.TP
.B start [SERVICE|DOMAIN]...
Starts configured dCache services. If one or more services or domains
are specified, only those services or domains are started. See the
description of the \fBstatus\fR and \fBservices\fR commands on how to
obtain a list of configured domains and services.

.TP
.B stop [SERVICE|DOMAIN]...
Stops running services. If one or more services or domains are
specified, only those services or domains are stopped. See the
description of the \fBstatus\fR and \fBservices\fR commands on how to
obtain a list of configured domains and services.

.TP
.B restart [SERVICE|DOMAIN]...
Restarts configured services. If one or more services or domains
are specified, only those services or domains are restarted. See the
description of the \fBstatus\fR and \fBservices\fR commands on how to
obtain a list of configured domains and services.

.TP
.B condrestart [SERVICE|DOMAIN]...
Restarts running services.  If one or more services or domains are
specified, only those services or domains are restarted. See the
description of the \fBstatus\fR and \fBservices\fR commands on how to
obtain a list of configured domains and services.

.SH MONITORING COMMANDS

.TP
.B status

Reports the status of all configured domains. This includes the
service type provided by the domain, whether the domain is running,
and the current PID of the domain.

.TP
.B services
Provides a list of configured domains, the service type provided by
each domain and the corresponding log file.

.Tp
.B version
Shows the dCache version number.

.SH POOL MANAGEMENTS COMMANDS

.TP
.B pool ls
Provides a list of all configured pools. This list includes the path
to the pool, the pool name, the domain hosting the pool, the size of the
pool and the amount of free space on the file system containing the pool.

.TP
.B pool create SIZE PATH

Creates a new pool in the specified directory. The directory must not
exist. It is verified that the file system has enough free space to
host a pool of the given size.

The size is specified in bytes or with an optional suffix of K, M, G
or T for kibibytes, mebibytes, gibibytes and tebibytes,
respectively. The size is rounded down to the nearest integer of
gibibytes.

The directory will be created and populated with the necessary files
to host a pool, however the pool will not be added to the dCache
configuration. A separate invocation using the \fBpool add\fR command
is needed to do so.

.TP
.B pool add [--fqdn] [--domain=DOMAIN] [--lfs=MODE] NAME PATH
Adds the pool created in PATH to the dCache configuration. The NAME
must be a unique pool name. The script verifies that neither the pool
name nor the pool path is already configured on the local host.

If no domain is specified, the pool is added to the default pool
domain. The default pool domain name is generated from the hostname. A
custom domain name may be specified, however the domain must not be
used by any other service and the name must have the suffix
\fBDomain\fR. If the domain is not previously defined, it will be
after this call.

A pool is always tagged with a host identifier. This tag is used by
dCache to identify whether two pools run on the same host. By default,
the hostname is chosen as the identifier. If the \fBfqdn\fR option is
specified, the fully qualified domain name will be used instead. This
is useful if a dCache installation is distributed over multible DNS
domains.

The \fBlfs\fR option determines the large file store modeof the
pool. The default is \fBprecious\fR. Possible values are \fBnone\fR,
\fBprecious\fR, \fBhsm\fR, \fBvolatile\fR, and \fBtransient\fR. In
most deployments \fBprecious\fR is used for a disk-only pool and
\fBnone\fR for a tape attached pool.

Notice that dCache cannot verify that the pool name is unique
throughout the whole dCache installation. It is the responsibility of
the user to ensure that the name is indeed unique for the whole
installation.

.TP
.B pool reconstruct POOL DESTINATION
Reconstructs the Berkeley DB database containing pool meta data. POOL
is the name of a pool. DESTINATION is the directory in which the
reconstructed database will be stored. DESTINATION must not exist
prior to calling this command.

The operation is only relevant for pools using the Berkeley DB meta
data backend. Pools using the classic control directory cannot be
reconstructed.

Although the Berkeley DB backend deploys a log structured database, it
can break in case the files get corrupted. This could happen due to OS
failures or hardware failures. In such cases reconstructing the
database is often able to recover most if not all data.

Notice that the command creates the database in a new directory. One
has to manually replace the content of the meta directory of the pool
with the reconstructed database. It is recommended to keep a copy of
the old database.

.TP
.B pool remove NAME
Removes the pool with the given name from the dCache
configuration. The pool is \fBnot\fR physically deleted from the file
system. If a the domain hosting the pool becomes empty, that domain is
removed from the configuration.

.SH DEBUGGING COMMANDS

.TP
.B dump heap [--force] DOMAIN FILE
Dumps the Java heap of DOMAIN to FILE. The file will contain
information about all objects and can be analysed with the Java
\fBjhat(1)\fR utility. Notice that the file might contain confidential
information, such as host keys.

If the domain hangs, then the dump may fail. In those cases the
\fBforce\fR option can force the dump, however the dump will not be
quite as useful, as it will also contain objects that are no longer in
use.

This feature requires that the Java 6 JDK is installed.

.TP
.B dump threads [SERVICE|DOMAIN] ...
Dumps the Java stack traces of all running threads in DOMAIN or
SERVICE. If no services or domains are specified, stack traces of all
running domains will be dumped. The information is written to the log
files of the respective domains.

.SH DEFINITIONS

.PP
The following definitions are used throughout this document:

.TP
.B cell
A component of dCache. dCache consists of many cells. A cell must have
a name which is unique within the domain hosting the cell.
.TP
.B domain
A container hosting one or more dCache cells. A domain runs within its
own process. A domain must have a name which is unique throughout the
dCache instance.
.TP
.B well known cell
A cell which name is published to other domains. Well known cells can
be addressed without knowing the domain hosting the cell. Well known
cells must have a name which is unique throughout the dCache instance.
.TP
.B service
The type of a domain. A service defines the cells running within the
domain.
.TP
.B pool
A cell providing physical data storage services.

.SH WHAT IS DCACHE

The core part of the dCache has proven to combine heterogenous disk
storage systems in the order of several hundred tera bytes and let its
data repository appear under a single filesystem tree. It takes care
of data hot spots, failing hardware and makes sure, if configured,
that at least a minimum number of copies of each dataset resides
within the system to ensure full data availability in case of disk
server maintainance or failure. Furthermore, dCache supports a large
set of standard access protocols to the data repository and its
namespace.

If dCache is connected to a Tertiary Storage System, it optimizes
access to such a system by various techniques. Currently Enstore, the
Open Storage Manager (OSM), the High Performance Storage System (HPSS)
and the Tivoli Storage Manager (TSM) are supported by the dCache
middleware.

Moreover, dCache/SRM supports all interfaces of the LCG storage
element definition.

.SH PROJECT PARTNERS

dCache is a joint venture between the Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron
(DESY) and the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL). Since
January 2007, the Nordic Data Grid Facility (NDGF) is contributing
significantly to this project.

.SH AUTHORS

This man page and the dcache script was written by
Gerd Behrmann <behrmann@ndgf.org>.
