.TH DCACHE-BOOTLOADER 8 "August 2010" "" ""

.SH NAME
BootLoader \- Boot loader for dCache

.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBjava\fR org.dcache.util.BootLoader [OPTION]... COMMAND [ARGS]

.SH DESCRIPTION

The low level boot loader of dCache. It is used by the init script to
start domains and to parse configuration files. There is usually no
need to invoke the boot loader directly.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB-q\fR
Do not emit errors if configuration assigns values to forbidden
properties.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
.B start DOMAIN
start a domain. DOMAIN is the name of the domain to start. The layout
file is scanned and the batch files of services defined for this
domain are executed.

.TP
.B compile
generates a shell function that can provide any configuration property
of any configured domain.

.SH CONFIGURATION PROPERTIES

Most properties are interpreted by services. A few properties are
however used by the boot loader directly. These are described below.

.TP
.B dcache.paths.defaults
Paths to the default configuration files.  Each supplied PATH is is
either a file or a directory.  If PATH is a file then it is read as a
dCache configuration file.  If PATH is a directory then all files in
that directory that end \fB.properties\fR are parsed as configuration
files.

.TP
.B dcache.paths.plugins
Paths to plugins. Each supplied PATH is scanned for
subdirectories. Each subdirectory is considered a plugin. All files in
plugins that end \fB.properties\fR are parsed as configuration
files. These configuration files are parsed after the default
configuration files.

.TP
.B dcache.paths.setup
Paths to the configuration files.  Each supplied PATH is is either a
file or a directory.  If PATH is a file then it is read as a dCache
configuration file.  If PATH is a directory then all files in that
directory that end \fB.properties\fR are parsed as configuration
files. These configuration files are parsed after the plugin
configuration files. The ordering is significant as the paths are
scanned in the order specified and the last declaration of a
configuration parameter will be used.

.TP
.B dcache.layout.uri
The URI to the layout file. The boot loader scans the layout file to
determine the domains and services specified for this dCache host.

.TP
.B dcache.domain.service.uri
URI to service batch file. A relative URI and path is resolved by
searching the plugin directories. If not found, it is resolved
relative to the URI defined by domain.service.uri.base.

.TP
.B dcache.domain.service.uri.base
Base URI for dcache.domain.service.uri.

.TP
.B dcache.domain.preload
The URI to a batch file executed during domain startup before any
services are started.

.TP
.B dcache.log.configuration
The URI to the log configuration file.

.P
In addition to the above properties, all Java system properties are
available. A summary of the standard properties is available at
\fBhttp://download-llnw.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/System.html#getProperties%28%29\fR


.SH IMPLICIT CONFIGURATION PROPERTIES

Some properties are injected into the configuration by the boot loader
and cannot be defined in configuration files. Configuration files may
however make use of these properties to define other properties.

.TP
.B host.name
The host name of this host.

.TP
.B host.fqdn
The fully qualified domain name of this host.

.TP
.B dcache.domain.name
The name of the current domain as defined in the layout file.

.TP
.B dcache.domain.service
The name of the current service as defined in the layout file.

.TP
.B <service>.cell.name
Primary cell name of the service.

.TP
.B dcache.domains
White space separated list of all domains on this host.

.TP
.B dcache.cells
White space separated list of all cells in this domain.


