.TH DCACHE-BILLING-INDEXER 8 "October 2013" "" ""

.SH NAME
dcache-billing-indexer \- Indexing tool for dCache billing files

.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBdcache-billing-indexer\fR [OPTION]... COMMAND

.SH DESCRIPTION

Tool for indexing, compressing, and scanning dCache billing files.

Billing files retain a complete log of all file transfers in dCache. Due
to the sheer number of transfers, billing files may grow quite large and
should be compressed to conserve disk space. Since searching for entries
in a large number of compressed billing files is a slow process, billing
files may be indexed before compression, thus greatly improving the response
time for searches.

Index files are bloom filters containing paths, PNFS IDs and DNs, and their
prefixes, of billing entries. A Bloom filter is compact probabilistic
data structure with a small false positive rate. Thus indexes are complete,
but occasionally the false positive rate may cause a billing file
to be read in vain.

Billing entries are parsed using the format strings from the billing
configuration. Therefore only billing entries that have format strings
are indexed. If the format is customized, old entries may no longer be
indexable, however existing indexes will still be valid. Care should be
taken that format strings are unambiguous so no two formats match the
same billing entry.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
\fB-all [-fpp=PROP] [-dir=BASE]\fR
(Re)index all billing files.

.TP
\fB-compress FILE...\fR
Compress \fBFILE\fR.

.TP
\fB-decompress FILE...\fR
Decompress \fBFILE\fR.

.TP
\fB-find [-files] [-dir=BASE] SEARCHTERM...\fR
Output billing entries that contain \fBSEARCHTERM\fR. Valid search terms are
path, pnfsid, dn and path prefixes of those. Optionally output names
of billing files that might contain the search term.

.TP
\fB-find [-files] [-dir=BASE] -f=FILE\fR
Read one or more newline separated search terms from FILE. Output billing entries
that contain any of the search terms. Valid search terms are path, pnfsid, dn and
path prefixes of those. Optionally output names of billing files that might
contain the search term.

.TP
\fB-index [-fpp=PROP] FILE...\fR
Create index for FILE.

.TP
\fB-yesterday [-compress] [-fpp=PROP] [-dir=BASE] [-flat=BOOLEAN]\fR
Index yesterday's billing file. Optionally compresses the billing file
after indexing it.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB-dir=BASE\fR
Base directory for billing files. Default is taken from dCache
configuration.

.TP
\fB-flat=BOOLEAN\fR
Chooses between flat or hierarchical directory layout. Default is
taken from dCache configuration.

.TP
\fB-fpp=PROP\fR
The false positive probability expressed as a value in (0;1]. The
default is 0.01.
